In manner and style, John Koldis and Howard Perry as student administrators.
I had had no experience with administrators like either one until that time.
I thought they were great.
I thought they were great people.
I still do, of course.
They worked well together.
John would get mad at Perry.
Perry would get mad at John.
They would both get mad at all the rest of us on the staff, but nobody's feelings ever got hurt, and it was a very enjoyable relationship, it really was.
Now you got here what time of the year?
June.
I think it was June.
It was hot, I'll tell you that.
And where did you all live?
We bought a house, this house as a matter of fact.
When we came down here the first time, that's how certain we were that we were coming back.
We bought this house.
Pat Smith was the realtor.
Bill Vance was living two or three doors away and was our lawyer then.
Was it a brand new house?
This house?
It was about eleven, I think ten or eleven years old at that time.
And it's now, gee, we've been here what, twenty-five, twenty-six years?
So it's thirty-plus years old.
How was it, what was it like to move into this for you and your wife, to move into this new community?
It was, well of course the house itself was bigger than we were used to.
We loved it because we had four boys then.
And the neighborhood was full of kids.
There was the Popes, Dave Pope and his family.
At the time that we moved in, there was the guy who has the office machine business.
I can't remember his name.
But shortly after that, the Bowers moved in.
And across the street, there were the Woods.
He was a retired TTI.
Is it TTI?
Texas Transportation.
The whole neighborhood was full of kids and we just loved that.
And that worked out so beautifully, it really did.
And was it easy for a North Carolinian to
accept and be accepted in Texas?
Yes, I think so.
Wheezy certainly had no trouble.
She was president of the Medical Society Women's Auxiliary before long.
Charles Behrens had come on the staff of the Health Center then.
And Mildred Behrens, his wife, was president another year.
Yeah, no, there was no difficulty.
There was none for me that I recall.
What about your relations with the local medical community?
Good, good.
I joined the medical, county medical society right away and was very happy.
And no one in any way gave you the impression
that there were some problems at the health center that you needed to unravel?
No.
Some mess you needed to clean up?
Nothing like that?
No, they didn't.
If they knew what the situation was at the health center, nobody ever talked about it.
But you see things are improving all along as we talk here and as we move into the new building.
And that's when I first met Jack, of course, when we went into the new building.
Was the building already designed?
Yes.
Yes, as a matter of fact, and there.
And I don't remember when I first went through it, but I had to wear a hard hat, so it was early on.
Describe your impressions of that new building.
Oh, I thought it was beautiful.
I thought it was absolutely gorgeous from the outside.
I couldn't tell a great deal about the inside.
As it turned out, I loved the inside, the art collection, the furniture.
Francis Goff, incidentally, the nurse, had a great deal to do with design and ideas about that building.
that she didn't get credit for.
Got to know the people in facilities and planning and the people who would do the furnishings.
Then people began to consult with us as to what we wanted.
It was great.
It was really great.
When we finally added, when we completely outgrew that building as we did,
We began planning an addition, and I absolutely insisted, and this was hard for them to do, it really was, the architects up there in Allison, north of Dallas, that the exterior not, that it not look added on at the outside, that it be the same stuff that the original health center was.
Very hard for them to do.
But they did an excellent job.
They did an excellent job.
As you began the real routine, what were some of the ways in which you discovered what Aggies really are?
What were some of the health needs they had and the way they came over?
Yeah.
We had them all sign in at the front desk, a little card that was kept on file that as far as I know, nobody ever looked at again.
But nevertheless, they signed in with their complaint and they were routed.
If it was just a cold, they were routed to the cold clinic.
If it was anything of any possible consequence,
Otherwise, they were routed back to the clinic.
They had all the interesting things that they signed in with.
I'll never forget one guy who signed in with a backache.
When I went out, I called him.
They sat outside the doors of the individual offices.
He was in such a position as I think a contortionist couldn't get in.
Didn't even realize it.
I said, okay, you've got a backache, you know, and you're sitting like this.
Another guy, his complaint was insomnia, and of course, he was sound asleep.
A lot of interesting experiences like that.
We, I had, I treated one student with AIDS, which was so tragic.
One of the nicest.
About when was that?
Early in the year or late?
That would have been in, you mean early in the school year?
No, no, early in your time or late?
Either somebody told me, I suppose Frances may have told me.
Frances was my mentor in a way.
She would say, I don't think you can do that, or Aggies don't do it that way, or something like that.
This guy was such a nice guy.
He had nothing, had no private means of being treated.
He had been treated.
They had started treatment in Houston.
He had an indwelling catheter up here, subclavian it is, with about three injection sites.
He had stuff, I don't remember precisely what it was now,
But nobody would do it for him.
So I admitted him as an inpatient and saw to it that he was the only one in the room and really
wrestled with the idea of whether I should say this guy has AIDS and that's why we're sort of semi-isolating him here and that's why I'm treating him personally and no one else is and that sort of thing.
I don't remember.
I must have told some of the nurses because they had to know, but I didn't tell anybody else.
I don't know whether it was Francis or not who told me that I shouldn't do that, but I was going to do that.
I did that.
There were a fair number of things, situations like that, that I ran into that I shouldn't have been doing.
But for the sake of the student, I was the only one that could do it.
That is the example that I remember so well.
We had students who would go out on leave.
We'd give them leave and they'd go out and they'd come back drunk and if they did it more than once we'd kick them out and tell them they couldn't come back.
We didn't mean it really.
We had flu epidemics and we filled, I mean filled, you know what the health center looks like.
the capacity it would have had the second floor because that was all inpatients then.
We had the place absolutely filled.
We had every bed we could get our hands on with curtains around and I suppose we had maybe 40 or mid 40s even
inpatients at any given time during that particular epidemic.
About how many times did that sort of epidemic occur?
Once a year.
Normally about when?
Soon after Christmas?
Right.
Usually after Christmas when the students would bring back their new viruses and they would give them to other students who weren't, had not been exposed to them over Christmas until spring semester.
Then it stopped.
Was it more likely to be the male or female students?
Both.
Uh-huh.
That's certainly one way we didn't discriminate.
We didn't put a girl and a guy in the same room, but they were all mixed up otherwise.
Shortly, I get way ahead of myself, but shortly after I left, they closed
the outpatient, the second floor altogether.
And I don't think now, and I must say I haven't been out there to see it because I've had nothing really in common with the people out there now, don't even know them.
But I understand that there's no medical services on the second floor at all, that they're, oh,
That's a word I want.
People who advise you what to do or what not to do and that sort of thing.
Some of the Wade Birch's group.
What is that?
Counseling Center?
Counseling Center, yeah, of course.
But at any rate, they just wiped us out.
One of the very first things they did when I left, and again, I still get ahead of myself, but one of the first things they did when I left
was to change the front doors.
We had a lot of trouble with the front doors.
They were big, they were heavy, they were hard to open, they were hard to close, they would come off their hinges.
Had a lot of trouble with them.
I complained from the year one about those big doors.
Well I suppose probably I hadn't been retired more than a few months before those doors were changed and they were glass and now they're glass.
They closed the kitchen.
That was so dear to my heart really because we could serve inpatients and then of course they stopped having inpatients too so they didn't really need the kitchen.
And I could get real, real cool.
The nurses criticized me terribly for keeping the air conditioning turned so far down.
And that sometimes I would go in the walk-in refrigerator and sit down and cool off in there.
So I didn't have that anymore.
Once you kind of got settled in, in the early years, describe a typical day's routine.
We would see probably as many as average 400, give or take a few, patients.
That's a lot of people.
And this was when staff was a little low.
I'd say five of us.
And beginning at what time of day?
Beginning at 8, officially.
And I rode with Perry every day.
He picked me up.
And if we got there at 7 o'clock, as we sometimes did, I would open the doors at 7 and somebody walked in and there was something I could take care of and did.
And we were supposed to close at 5, and we did close the front doors at 5.
But then the students went upstairs for their outpatient service.
They got to the point that sometimes they abused that.
But we just hung in there with it because we wanted round-the-clock service.
So 400 patients.
The most we ever saw in a single day was 699.
Now those were sign-ins at the front desk.
wanted lab work and some wanted x-rays and some wanted lacerations sutured and some had colds and so forth and so on, the whole gamut.
And for that four to six hundred, there were how many MDs at work during that day?
There were usually five.
And I say usually, they left
as quickly as they could after five o'clock.
I mean, they just disappeared.
One of the physicians, and I tell you because it's interesting, one of the physicians would sneak out of the building when he thought I didn't know anything about it.
And he would, and the door was only a one-way door.
It was in the new addition and it, of course, couldn't close or he would have to come into the front door again.
He would put a book of matches in the door so it wouldn't close, and I would go and take the matches out.
So he'd have to come in the front.
Another one would say, well, I'm not going to see any patients until he sees patients.
And he would sit there with the door closed with the hall full of students reading the newspaper.
I got pretty upset.
I hated to get upset in front of students.
Uh, and I almost, I just, I always try to do it behind closed doors.
But, but these, sometimes these grown men had to be treated like children.
And, uh, were the, in, in those years, were they all, all the MDs were male?
Yes.
The first MD, the first female was Barbara Tyler who was a graduate of our medical school.
And then Peggy Shelton, both of whom were good.
Barbara is still there.
Peggy is smart as a whip.
She's much older of course now.
But she was hard, it was hard for her to get along with Barbara.
Uh...
And during those years, did UMDs differentiate between what problems you dealt with or did you take whatever?
Yes and no.
We would refer students among ourselves or between ourselves.
If we got to a knotty problem, we would consult with each other, yeah.
What was your normal concentration or preference?
I had an office just like the rest of them and saw patients there.
This was when they didn't make appointments, it was just walk-ins.
And I would also take care of the treatment room, which was right across the hall from my office.
And I wanted it that way because I wanted to take care of the treatment room.
Treatment room means lacerations.
It means the injections.
Well, all injections really.
Acute, non-fatal you might say, injuries.
Did you handle a broken arm?
Oh yes, sprains, strains.
If a fracture could be, I did many fracture, fingers and wrists and that sort of thing.
I didn't attempt big things.
I certainly was not an orthopedist.
We would schedule those for special clinics.
But I did all kinds of plastering and suturing.
I loved to do those things.
I really did.
So you got there to begin before 8.
Then lunch was how long?
Maybe half an hour, but it was in the building.
I just went down, took the elevator down or the stairs down to the kitchen.
And then the afternoon until about what time?
Oh, I seldom.
Weezy could tell you that better than I could.
I seldom left the building.
Perry would leave me gone.
And I seldom left the building before, oh, 6.30, 7 o'clock.
And depending on circumstances, if I were on call, I would might get call back.
And that was like every fifth day, weekday and every fifth weekend.
I had two physicians who I saw a lot of trouble with.
One has since retired and one I fired at the time.
And the people who argue their cases and decide whether they really should be fired or they can come back to work, whoever, we had those hearings.
I remember Malin helped me with those.
But anyway, I fired them.
One of them was scheduled for a weekend.
He maintained that he had switched the weekend with somebody else.
That was all right as long as they kept it covered, you know.
And the other one said, no, you didn't switch with me.
I'm not working this weekend.
The other one said, well, I'm not working this weekend.
Well, I thought they would break down.
I thought they would break down and one of the other of them would show up, you know.
I worked the whole weekend.
Monday morning, bright and early.
I had a little talk with them and fired them right then and there, as bad as we needed people.
Almost, at that point, warm bodies.
And they both, no, I beg your pardon, one of them didn't complain to that commission, whoever it is.
He stayed fired.
The other one did, and I was forced to rehire him.
He never spoke another word to me for, I'd say, probably upwards of a year and a half.
Never another word.
And, of course, I made a special effort to speak to him so that there was no question about who the culprit was here.
Do you remember the first football season and or the first bonfire?
Yes.
I can't swear to the first bonfire, but I do remember the first football season.
And that came as a surprise.
Nobody told me that we were supposed to offer medical coverage for the football games.
And I was just into it, you know, and that was it.
Athletic department had gave me tickets to football games.
So I thought, oh great, I'm going to get to see football games.
Well, I hardly ever got to see a football game.
I certainly never got to see an entire one.
In the heat, which of course there was plenty of at the first of the season, we saw heat strokes.
When it was windy, we saw people with things in their eyes.
When it was raining, we saw people who got umbrellas stuck in their eyes, the outer prongs.
Alcohol related?
Some.
Some, but very few.
Far fewer than you would expect.
Falls?
Stumbles?
Falls, yes.
Practically all of the beds, the tables, they actually were, in the one room that we had then were full all the time.
There was someone there.
So you would go to the football game, but then have to go back to the health center?
No, we had a little room, a single room at the stadium.
Later we campaigned and were successful in getting, especially when they added on to the stadium, new additional first aid rooms.
We also had an ambulance.
We had no ambulance to begin with.
We had no way of transporting people.
The first ambulance we had was given to us by a mother of a student.
It was a station wagon.
It was his station wagon.
They always got him a new station wagon every year so she gave us his old station wagon.
And we transported people.
That was our ambulance.
We transported people in that thing.
And sometimes their noses were touching the top of the roof.
And one time we had to roll down the back window for a guy's feet to stick out.
That was a lot of fun.
But then we got, I talked John into, I say I talked John into, I think Perry helped too, getting an actual ambulance, not a big one.
Now they have a much bigger one.
And of course we had all kinds of complaints of hot rodders and that sort of thing, which I fully expected and always defended the EMTs.
Then we got a new, when we put the new addition on the health center, we put a room for the EMTs.
So they stayed there around the clock.
But, so that was my football experience.
Well, it got a little bit less, a little bit better and better as we got more EMTs down there.
They would do much of the stuff that I had been doing and call me if they got in trouble.
Are you saying EMTs?
EMTs, Emergency Medical Technician.
Oh, okay.
Paramedics, you'd think of these days.
Who funded that?
The health center.
They, they were a committee of the MSC, but I don't believe they got any money from them.
So they either had to use their own money or the health center actually funded them.
Well I know we did because we gave them supplies from the health center.
We had the ambulance for them.
We had the call room for them.
We gave them the radio equipment.
We funded them.
The health center funded them.
Now did the health center budget
Was it enrollment-based so that as the enrollment went up, your funding went up?
Not enrollment, no, it wasn't enrollment-based.
At least to my knowledge, John may know more about that than I, but it was need-based as far as physicians, keeping good physicians like Dwayne Leggin, remember him?
The best physician I ever had, he saved my life.
When I had a coronary out there.
I spelled his last name.
L-A-G-A-N.
He is the Director of Student Health Services at Virginia Tech.
And occasionally I can see him on television, come out on the field.
Wonderful, wonderful person.
He just happened to be here one week after he had left.
when I had a heart attack and rode in the ambulance with me to the St.
Joseph Hospital.
And he was right there when my heart stopped beating and did CPR.
And I told him I felt like an elephant stepped on my, when I regained consciousness, that I felt like an elephant had stepped on my chest, you know.
And of course it was just him.
I'm sure he broke some bones or so.
He left because of money and he wanted to, I think maybe he had a taste of the administrative and he wanted to do that too.
So that's what he's doing right now.
And I had very, very seldom hear from him and I haven't been up there to see him.
He's in Blacksburg in the mountains.
As you began to settle in, oh, excuse me.
So we, our, to my knowledge, our additions to the staff and our budgets were not dependent on actual student enrollment, but on what we
were able to scrounge out of John and Perry.
Perry, of course, in particular, at budget time.
Because the students paid no fee, did they?
Paid no fee.
That's right.
For the no fee.
Oh, they paid a student health center fee that the.
It was collected over there.
Right, right.
I thought of it as an MSC fee, but that was collected in the fee office, not at the health center.
What about the medicines that you all provided them?
Free.
How often did a non-student attempt to get treatment over there?
Very seldom.
I incised some thrombosed hemorrhoids for non-students.
I treated a lot of things that I wanted to, just because I wanted to, and sometimes I'll admit that I sort of tried to make it look like I was just having a friendly visit with the administrator who was there, you know.
Which I was always, but you know, sometimes we did other things.
I think the very, very first house call that I made was to Jack Williams' house when Margaret called me.
I'll never forget the afternoon.
It was a rainy, soggy sort of, the ground must have been soggy that deep afternoon.
early afternoon, and she called and asked that I come over that Jack was having some kind of spells.
And I did, and I was sitting there talking with him.
He's talking just like we're talking.
And all of a sudden he lost consciousness.
Is this 76?
Is this when he, is this when he, so I guess it is, yes.
Yes, I guess it would be.
Oh, please describe that as thoroughly as you can.
Okay.
As I said, I remember the day.
being rainy, and it had been rainy and dreary, and Margaret Comey and I went over there.